JS backend post-merge update (#17)
input-output-hk/engineering: blog/2022-09-22-ghc-js.md

---
slug: 2022-09-22-ghc-js
title: Status of GHC's JavaScript backend (September 2022)
authors: [sylvain]
tags: [ghc]
---

> For a few months, the GHC DevX team at IOG has been working on implementing a JavaScript

Reviewer: I think we should adapt this post to just be the release post and then the first thing in the post is a list of features that work, ones that kind of work, and ones that completely don't work

At the time of writing there are still many failing tests.
If you want to help fixing them, be sure to get in touch with us so that we
coordinate.
Our aim is to remove all the failures before the merge into the main branch.
In some cases (e.g. tests for compact regions) we may have to disable some
broken tests (only for the JS backend of course) and to open issues in the bug
tracker.

## Removal of external dependencies

GHCJS made use of non-boot libraries (text, lens, megaparsec, aeson, etc.) that
GHC's JS backend can't use.
We've modified the code to avoid the use of these libraries.

GHCJS provided a few libraries (ghcjs-base, ghcjs-prim, etc.).
Instead of adding them as new boot libraries, we merged them into the existing
boot libraries (base, ghc-prim, etc.).

## General cleanup and documentation

GHC provides some utilities (pretty-printer, binary serialization, string
interning, etc.) that weren't used before.
We adapted the code to use them to make the JS backend similar to other
backends and for performance reasons.

3 of us (out of 4) were totally new to GHCJS's code base.
We strived to understand the code and to make it easier to understand by adding

> a lot of comments and by refatoring it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a lot of comments and by refactoring it.
```

We have a few blog posts explaining some technical details about GHCJS's
internals.
Most of the contents of the blog posts should have made its way into comments in
the code itself.

TODO list blog posts

Some modules of the JS backend still need to be cleaned up before the merge
though.

## FFI

Usual FFI imports can be used to call a foreign function.
However GHCJS also supports some fancy syntax that indicates that a foreign
import is in fact a template of code to inline at call sites.
The JS backend only supports FFI calls for now.
Converting codes making use of the fancy syntax is usually straightforward, for
example with fat arrows:

TODO example of code change

We did this for the FFI imports in base.
Performance may not be as optimal as with the fancy syntax, depending on if the
JS engine optimises anonymous function applications like this.

> Reintroducing the fancy syntax could be done later.

Reviewer: and these people are probably our first users! Perhaps we need to make a migration guide :thinking:

It could use a ghc-proposal to motivate it with performance data and
bikeshedding of the syntax.
The JS backend could also automatically figure out how to perform the FFI
function application statically.

## Template Haskell

GHC supports external interpreters for Template Haskell that are especially
useful for cross-compilation (the internal interpreter requires the target code to be
linked with the compiler, which is impossible with a cross-compiler).

Incidentally the design of the external interpreter (also called "Iserv")
originated in GHCJS's TH server, but there are quite a few differences between
the two.
We are currently investigating how to retrofit GHCJS's TH runner into GHC's
Iserv but we don't have results to present yet.

## Plugins

GHC doesn't support plugins when it is built as a cross-compiler (cf #14335).
This is because it isn't modular enough to support two environments at once: one
for the target code (JS code here) and one for the host (native x86 or ARM code
for the plugin).
We've spent a lot of time making it more modular (see our white paper and HIW

> lightning talk TODO links) but there is a lot more to do to achieve this.

Reviewer: and the tracking ticket that John has. I think they are all linked by the master issue: https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/issues/17957

GHCJS used a fragile hack to support plugins: at plugin loading time it would
substitute the plugin package with another corresponding one from another
package database.

> It was fragile because it could mess up with GHC's single environment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It was fragile because it could (and frequently did) violate GHC's single environment assumption.
```

assumptions.

> We didn't port GHCJS's hack. Nevertheless we have implemented a new way for GHC

Reviewer: I think a theme or point we should make is that this is a good time to reflect on the design and architecture of GHCJS and make any sensible changes based on the previous decade of learning. Then, this plugin hack (and the FFI stuff) is are examples of areas that we thought we could improve

to load plugins directly from libraries instead of packages.
This method doesn't require GHC to load module interfaces for the plugin and its
dependencies.
You can load a plugin with the following flags:

TODO plugin load example

## Performance and code size

Performance and code size should be worse with the JS backend in its current
state than with GHCJS!

> We have been following roughly this roadmap:

Reviewer: Link: https://wiki.c2.com/?MakeItWorkMakeItRightMakeItFast

- make it work: JS backend able to build a runnable HelloWorld program
- make it correct: fixing bugs found by the testsuite (current stage)
- make it fast: not yet started!

In particular we haven't yet ported the following GHCJS passes:
- JS code optimiser
- link-time-optimizations ("compactor")

> We do plan to reimplement them in some form in the future.

Reviewer: and now we can link to issues too!

Compactor: https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/issues/22352

We may use this refactoring opportunity to introduce an intermediate AST between
STG and JS that would make them more elegant (e.g. no need to parse JS
identifiers generated by GHCJS).

> The JS backend performance itself may be suboptimal as we haven't made any

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The JS backend performance itself is suboptimal as we haven't made any
```

We should be very upfront that the JS backend is still slow and not ready for industrial use cases yet

serious profiling of it yet.
Any help appreciated! Get in touch with us if you want to help so that we can
coordinate our efforts.

## Libraries: C sources and shims

Libraries that use C sources (`c-sources` Cabal stanza) aren't supported by the
JS backend.

> In the future we could probably use Emscripten to compile the C source and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the future we plan to use Emscripten to compile the C source and
```

Just a writing note to avoid passive voice and fuzzy language like `we could probably`, either we will and plan to do it, or we won't. Saying `we may probably` does not convey confidence in the work.

generate some adapter code for it, but this isn't done yet.

> There are two ways to fix libraries that use C sources. The C code has to be
> rewritten either in Javascript or in Haskell. Then it is possible to use Cabal
> predicates (e.g. `arch(js)`) to select between the different versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two ways to fix libraries that use C sources. The C code can either be rewritten in Javascript, or it can be rewritten in Haskell. Then it is possible to use Cabal
predicates (e.g. `arch(js)`) to select between the different versions.
```

We do have a preference for writing a pure Haskell version because it is more

> future proof. For example if someone adds some new backends for Lua, Java, CLR,
> etc.

Reviewer: > future proof. For example if someone adds some new backends for Lua, Java, CLR,
etc.

Then...what? This never says how it is more future proof

```suggestion
future proof. For example if someone adds some new backends for Lua, Java, CLR,
etc. then the Haskell version can be compiled by that backend because it will be reduced to STG or Core like any other Haskell program and since the backend must compile Haskell code anyway there is no extra work. In contrast, if the C source is rewritten in JavaScript, then it would need to be rewritten _for each_ backend.
```

That's basically what we've done when we wrote ghc-bignum which provides a
"native" implementation written in Haskell that is functionally equivalent to
the GMP based implementation.
Also writing Haskell is way more pleasant than writing Javascript code.
We wrote the JS backend to avoid you this pain so please use it.

Note that GHCJS came with a "shim" library where a shim is a JS source for some
package.
The JS backend won't provide shims so these JS sources will have to be
upstreamed or reimplemented in Haskell.

> We already started to implement a pure Haskell version of ByteStrin:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We already started to implement a pure Haskell version of ByteString:
```

1. GHCJS's incremental linking support ("base" bundles) hasn't been ported. This
   feature required too many changes (e.g. adding new command-line flags) and
   would have been backend-specific. This might be implemented in the future if
   it proves to be useful for the newer TH implementation for example.

2. GHCJS's JS code optimizer hasn't been ported. The code was fragile and slow. We
   plan to work on an intermediate representation between STG and JS to perform
   the same optimizations in a safer/faster way.

3. GHCJS's compactor (link time optimizations) code hasn't been ported. Some
   optimizations have been reimplemented (e.g. global renaming of local
   identifiers), but some other are lacking (e.g. compacting initialization code).
   We plan to work on this as part of a larger effort on refactoring the code
   generator, the linker, and some runtime system aspects.
   See also [#22352](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/issues/22352)

4. GHCJS's support for plugins hasn't been ported. The implementation was
   unsafe (exchanging a unit for another when GHC tries to load a plugin).
   Fixing this properly is a daunting task because of GHC's lack of modularity

>    (see #14335): GHC assumes there is a single global unit environment.

Reviewer 2: It might not be clear this points to ghc issue tracker - I'd add explicit link here.
There are 4 links without url like that in the article (search for # followed by number).

Author: Thanks, should be fixed now
